# the Event-Related Potential Technique



## Basic principles of ERP recording

### the Reference Problem

There is one *ground electrode*, one *reference electrode* and many *active electrodes* in the EEG recording system. Since we must connect the latter to the ground circuit to enable a working amplifier, there will inevitably be some noise in the ground electrode G. Therefore, we use a reference electrode R. Instead of outputing the voltage A - G, we output (A - G) - (R - G) to eliminate the noise in G.

The position of ground electrode can be arbitrary, but it's difficult to choose the reference electrode because it's assumed that there will be few neural activity there, so that the computed voltage will contain less distraction from the electrical activity around the reference electrode. Fortunately, the choice of reference electrode can be done offline.

One common practice is to reference the data by the average of all electrodes (which means subtracting it from the original signal A - R, where R can be arbitrarily placed).

Another method is to carefully choose the location of the reference electrode. First, it should make the participant feel comfortable. Second, it should not bias toward any hemisphere (so we can use Cz, or averaged mastoids / earlobes). Third, it should not be close to some big muscles. Forth, it should not be close to your region-of-interest. Fifth, it is good to choose a site that is commonly used before in the same area.

Generally speaking, averaged mastoids / earlobes is most commonly used (but it's not suitable for N170). If we want to use the average reference, there must be a large number of electrodes covering the most of the scalp in order to get a better average.

Another way to eliminate the reference problem is to transform the voltage distribution into current density estimation, which is intrinsically related to each point on the scalp.

### Electrodes and sampling

The International 10/20 System for electrodes placement: Nz at the nadion, Lz at the inion, A1 and A2 at the pre-auricular points.

The impedance of the electrode-scalp connection will generate noise in the recording. Therefore, you need to use the electrode gel, and clean and abrade the skin under the electrodes (which may be risky for disease transmission). A high-impedance system can be more convenient and safe, but it may be not so competent in reducing the common mode noise and skin potential artifacts, so you should monitor the impedance at each electrode and keep it within a reasonable range (e.g. <20k$\Omega$) by abrading the skin.

According to the Nyquist Theorem, you can only capture the information that has a frequency that is lower than half of the sampling rate. It is often implemented by a hardware filter with a cut-off frequency. For example, we can set the cut-off frequency as 150Hz and sample at 600Hz.



## Artifact Rejection and Correction

### Basic principles

Detecting the artifacts is like a signal detection problem, we should eliminate the artifacts while maintaining certain statistic power (i.e., the amount of trials). If an artifact is detected in a trial, data from all channels in this trial should be discarded.

If we use a pre-defined threshold (based on absolute voltage) of the EOG signal to eliminate artifacts and we're not using average reference, we must perform baseline correction first. The ERPLAB toolbox provides a better method to solve this problem other than absolute-threshold based algorithms. The threshold for rejection is usually modified on the basis of some empirical value, e.g. 50uV peak-to-peak difference. Visual inspection will help to determine the parameter for each subject.

### Common artifacts

**Blinks:** We can control the number of blinks by using short trial blocks of 1-3 minutes or brief ITI when subjects are encouraged to make eyeblinks, asking subjects to wear glasses instead of contact lenses, or simply asking them to reduce their eye blinks.

**Eye movement:** The voltage deflection of HEOG and VEOG can reflect the direction of the eye movement. Most commonly, the subject makes saccade to some position and then back to the fixation point, generating the boxcar-shaped voltage deflection in EOG recording. Importantly, saccade will also <u>trigger a visual ERP</u>, which can hardly be corrected. In order to detect the eye moment, we can simply use a threshold, or compare the signal continuously with a step function, which will be much better.

**Muscle and heart activity:** The EMG features high frequency noise as the muscle contracts. The most common artifact is generated by the temporalis muscles under the electrodes T7 and T8. Therefore, we must ask the participants to relax their jaws. Besides, if the participant frowns, there will also be an artifact near the Fp1 and Fp2 electrode. The movement of the neck can also be a problem, especially when we're using the mastoid reference. Trials with EMG usually don't need to be eliminated given enough control. The EKG (about 1Hz) can also propagate to the head. The effect of heart activity cannot be simply rejected but only corrected.

### Correction

First, we can model the eye movement as a dipole and compute its contribution to each channel. The second and more commonly used one is to statistically identify a set of components that have fixed scalp distributions, then subtract them from the signal, because these components usually reflects blink, eye movement, EKG or so. The most commonly used method is ICA, which is available in EEGLAB Toolbox.

Generally speaking, it is safe enough to use ICA-based blink and EKG correction. But there are still some pitfalls in using correction, so sometimes it's better to compare the results with that generated using rejection.